[Music]
so imagine you're an astronaut on the
International Space Station looking out
the window and you're craving a pizza
pepperoni cheesy hmm
let's say it's possible to order
delivery what would that bill look like
I'll just put it this way sending one
pound of cargo into space costs about
ten thousand dollars not including tip
so how do space agencies afford to send
supplies like oxygen water and food to
their astronauts well do they send it
with the crew before they found a more
efficient solution they pack all the
water into space with them in the
Rockets the water took up a lot of room
that could otherwise have been used for
other supplies that and the added weight
wasted fuel so short answer nope it
doesn't go with the crew from the get-go
that means they deliver it right and
that would be too risky and expensive
there's no 100% guarantee that something
bad won't happen to the cargo ship at
launch or on the way to the
International Space Station like space
pirates
if the cargo doesn't get to the station
then the next delivery will have to wait
a very long time that's not an option
since it's dangerous for the astronauts
okay
so let's break it down item by item
first where do astronauts get their
water the primary source of water for
the crew is the astronauts themselves
whether it's drops of sweat condensation
from breathing or going to the toilet
all this water gets processed through
complex filtering systems when it comes
out it's clean drinkable water yeah you
heard that right
astronauts recycle their own bodies h2o
in fact 85% of their tinkle can be
turned into clean water water in
separate cargo deliveries is still sent
to the ISS but with the invention of the
onboard water treatment system wrs
everything has become much simpler and
with the help of a process called
electrolysis they've learned how to
extract the necessary reserves of oxygen
from the water itself but more on that
here in a bit for now
let's see how the wrs works the
astronaut goes to the toilet and flushes
it all down the pardon me the liquid
contents fall into a compartment that
rotates very quickly and works like a
centrifuge this centrifuge is then
heated under pressure and high
temperature the liquid evaporates and
collects condensation in an external
chamber from there the condensed water
enters a tank all other moisture from
the ISS sweat and exhaled air goes into
this same tank from there the water
enters a separator where the liquid is
cleaned of odours after going through
several levels of filtration it gets
heated once again and disinfected and
presto clean water is ready after
knowing that do you think you could live
on the ISS let me know down in the
comments okay moving on to oxygen ah the
question of the day like I briefly
mentioned they can get oxygen from that
same water remember your chemistry
classes in school oxygen is the Oh part
of h2o
here's how they do it an electric
current is passed through water
molecules to break them down this
process is called electrolysis so after
that you've got two hydrogen atoms and
one pure oxygen atom they collect those
now separated oxygen molecules in
special cylinders and astronauts can
breathe easy
but where do the remaining hydrogen
molecules go they're also used to the
maximum benefit of the entire crew
through something called the Sabatier
reaction they mix the hydrogen with
carbon dioxide the stuff you're
breathing out right now to create water
incredible right so the ISS is
completely independent of the earth as
far as its water and air reserves go
unfortunately not
thanks to this complex system it's
possible to produce a little over four
pounds of oxygen per day that's only
enough for two people the ISS crew
usually consists of six so to make up
the difference oxygen is delivered from
Earth so what about food here the ISS is
completely dependent on supplies
delivered from Earth
all those freeze-dried packets of
astronaut food go along with the crew
when they head to the station or a
separate cargo is sent but you'd be
surprised by the number of options they
have according to NASA astronauts dine
on fruits nuts chicken beef seafood
candy and even brownies they also have
coffee tea juices and lemonade but why
can't they plant an indoor garden on the
station to eat fresh fruits and veggies
well it's not as easy as it sounds
how can plants grow in the vastly
different conditions of outer space
there's no gravity day and night are all
over the place the ISS sees 16 sunrises
and sunsets each day the air is dry it's
cold plus the ISS might be as long as a
football field but it's not like they
have a lot of room for a sprawling
Garden
well the good news is they've already
figured out a solution to all this and
astronauts are growing food up there in
members of the 44th ISS crew ate lettuce
that was fully grown on board the seeds
had been sent from Earth once in the
station they were put in a veggie box
with red blue and green lamps that each
provided a certain growing condition for
the seeds the experiment was successful
and the astronauts even said that the
lettuce tasted exactly the same as it
does on earth their next crop idea
tomatoes and cucumbers to go with that
space salad what do they do with their
trash well just like you and me
astronauts have garbage to disposable
utensils use towels raw materials empty
food packets you name it you think they
could just chuck it out into the endless
void of space but that would be
littering whenever they get a delivery
the cargo ship is docked to the station
the astronauts get what they need from
it and then they load this ship with
their trash after a few weeks the supply
vehicle is disconnected from the station
and it heads back to earth it might make
it to the surface or burn up in the
atmosphere but in short astronauts don't
litter then where does space debris come
from right now there are tons of
satellites floating around the earth you
have them to thank for your GPS or
satellite TV but there are so many of
these things up there that they
sometimes crash into each other there
remains create space trash in addition
to them the uncoupled parts of launch
vehicles become garbage too this garbage
seemingly harmless soaring in outer
space is a serious threat to the ISS
even a dime-sized fragment of a
satellite can penetrate the station's
casing and lead to major problems in all
of the ISS is 21 years the station
carried out 25 maneuvers to evade space
debris plus the station is covered with
protective plates that guard against a
tiny piece of debris shredding through
it
from the ISS to Mars the cool thing
about the International Space Station
becoming more and more self-sufficient
is that it's almost like a trial for
larger missions in the future I'm
talking about colonizing the Red Planet
baby instead of being a mere 250 miles
from Earth we'd be 140 million miles
from home
that means deliveries and trash dumps
won't be an option so what will they do
with their garbage
two words waste recycling the plan is to
process all garbage using the liquid
combustion system simply put organic and
inorganic waste would be collected
crushed and mixed with hydrogen peroxide
after a day an electric current is
passed through this mass and the
oxidation reaction starts all the
garbage will be stored in a device where
they'll put a colony of microorganisms
they'll eat the trash and emit free
electrons as a byproduct electrodes and
a battery will be connected to the
device which will accumulate energy you
know what all that means
scientists have learned how to recycle
garbage and turn it into electricity
with the help of germs that battery can
hold a charge of 400 hours after which
the bacteria will need to be replaced if
all this just sounds hypothetical
they've already pulled it off here on
earth in terrestrial conditions the next
step is to try it out in space besides
creating electricity with the help of
bacteria recycling waste will also be
good for gardening since it'll contain
nutrients and minerals for the plants
hey if you learned something new today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click to the left or right and remember
stay on the bright side of life
[Music]